yes another screencast thing yay
so today we are gonna be talking a
little bit about node a node is
something we've actually been using all
throughout the course its powers NPM in
fact NPM stands the node package manager
and like every time we've run NPM start
or serve or any of that sort of thing
we've been running node in fact BS code
which is an electron app runs browser
technologies but also it runs node.js
code in the background as well so all
the time you're using Visual Studio code
you're running code on node so what
actually is it node is a JavaScript
runtime for the server and what that
means is we're before we've been running
our JavaScript all entirely in the
browser you know in google chrome or
edge or Firefox or something like that
note is a way of running JavaScript
outside of that browser environment and
specifically it's designed for writing
server applications I don't think we've
spoken much about servers and that sort
of stuff yet but we will do before the
end of the course the main thing is it's
a way of just running node without
having to have all the other stuff that
you need for a browser like a a window
that's rendering text or you know with
doing all sorts of layout with HTML and
CSS and all that sort of stuff
node is just JavaScript and we can
actually start off and dive in by just
opening up our terminal and typing node
what this gives us is this little arrow
prompt and we can type JavaScript in
here just like we would in Chrome's
console and it's gonna evaluate those
things for us so we can interact with
like a lot of nodes like stuff through
here and we can we can add whatever we
want in terms of in terms of JavaScript
we can just like the chrome console we
can create variables and refer back to
those variables and do whatever we want
with those things maybe I don't know
whatever it is you get the general idea
it's just it's just JavaScript often
though just working with the terminal
the what we call the rattle that's
repple here stands for read evaluate
print loop which describes for how this
thing works really so I type ins and
stuff it reads it it evaluates it so it
figures out what the result that is it
print it out and then it loops back to
the top and gives me another prompt for
me to type some more stuff in so you
might hear us referring to the word
rattle a little bit in the future and if
you're not sure that's what it means
so um you know often the repple isn't
entirely what we want we want to
actually be able to put our JavaScript
in some files like we have been doing
with p5 and you know be able to run
those files run the code in those files
and see what happens so to do that first
of all we need to get out of this
wrapper so to do that the usual way that
you exit any terminal program is with
ctrl C and you can see node prompts us
to exit press ctrl C again or type dot
exit and either of these things are okay
I'm gonna press ctrl C again because
it's what I'm used to so to get going
with node we're going to create a little
project where he files in and just
explore some of the things that node can
do so I'm going to start off as I always
do by navigating to my projects folder
for you it's probably on your desktop
mine is in here and creating a new
folder called node node link noodling
noodling node node node noodles I don't
know cooller what you want mines called
node noodles now and I'm not sure why
but that's ok so here we are we've got
our folder we're gonna add all the
faster this little project and as usual
I'm going to start off with git init to
create a new empty git repository now I
can go to my editor now and open this up
node noodles here we go ok so the first
thing that we're going to do is create a
file and add some JavaScript in it so
I'm going to call it my no
script j/s because it's still a
javascript file and let's add something
in here she can add a consult at log of
hello world so we can save that and now
back in our terminal before we just ran
node and that gave us this record prompt
where we could add whatever we wanted
but if we want to run a specific script
in node the way that we do that is with
a node and then we give it the name of
the file with the code in it that we
want to run so node my node script is
and when I press ENTER now I get hello
world from there printed out so here we
go a working piece of node.js code and I
can add whatever I want here and make it
do whatever I want maybe how we could
write a function that makes numbers that
we give it its squares numbers that we
give it here we go square that number
times itself so the square our number is
the number times itself and now maybe I
can start using that function so maybe
I'll write a little for loop so for I
need my initializer I equals 0 I is less
than let's count from 0 up to 10 and
every time I go through my loop I want
to set i to i plus 1 so increase I by 1
and in here maybe we can square
something so that's make a variable
called result and make that the square
or whatever is zero one two three four
five six seven eight nine and we can
console log that result so there we go
another simple note script and I can
just come back here again and run it and
I'll see I'll get my hello world from
the top store and then the results of
all my code so this is just you're
running your code in exactly the same
way that the browser would the
difference is a bunch of stuff that
we've been used to working with in the
browser doesn't exist for example I
can't run ellipse if I try and run that
and save now and run my code I'm gonna
get an error saying ellipse is not
defined and that's because p5 well we
haven't included all the p5 code in node
and also we're not running in a browser
environment and p5 really needs you know
something to draw to a window a graphic
interface and we have that here because
node typically is working on the on the
command line so one thing that is often
very useful to do especially now that
we're doing more of this object-oriented
code is sharing stuff between files and
that's possible to do in node as well in
the browser the way that we do that is
in our index dot HTML adding extra
script tags so we have more than one
scripts linked from the same HTML file
but things are a little bit different in
node so let's create another file I'm
gonna pull it double or maybe Square
shout I'm gonna call it shout Doge a s
and in here I'm gonna define a new
function that shouts
any particular string that gets sent to
it so function shout and I can ask for a
message as input and I'm going to make a
shouting message by getting the message
and turning it to upper case and then
I'm gonna console.log my shouty message
so if I run my code now if I run node
shouts Doge ass then the output that I
get should be nothing because yep
because although we've created this
function we've told node what shout is
we haven't actually used this anywhere
so we could use it now if you wanted to
shout hi and run that again and there we
go we get hi shouted in uppercase but
what if we want to use shout from inside
of our main node script well we've
written it here so maybe we could just
try using it that might work like the
files are in the same folder so maybe
node will be able to like see them and
like figure out that they're related for
us somehow
shout I like shouting let's try it
node 9 node script ok so here we're
getting an error shout is not defined
which is a bit of a shame I guess we
can't just you know write this function
and have it know what we're talking
about just because we define it in this
file over here
so the mechanism
the node gives us four including
information from including code and like
functions and objects and stuff from
other files is something called require
so I can type require and then the name
of a javascript file and it's gonna
bring the contents it's going to run the
contents of that file for me it's
actually if I just add something in here
console dot log we in shout projects can
save that and actually I'm not gonna
test it in my node script is I'm
actually gonna test this file on the
repple because when I'm using the repple
I get more rapid feedback on what's
going on so run node to start the record
and now I can try and require shout yes
okay so I've got an error cannot find
module shout j/s and the reason for this
is when we don't start a file name with
a dot so referring to like the current
folder or the previous folder node looks
in some different places to try and find
it so we need to tell note that we're
looking for this file in the current
folder so we use that same docpath
syntax to find it so don't slash shout
is if I run this now then we get back
something a little bit weird we get
we're in shout DJ's which seems to
indicate that our console at loggers run
and we also get these curly brackets
which are an empty object but nothing
else seems to have happened but that's
okay maybe we have our shop function
available now let's try it
still no still no shout function the
thing that we need to do here is tell
note which things from this file we want
to be accessible outside of this file it
might be that there's like some special
code in here that's all about just the
specifics of how we do shouting and
other files outside of here don't
particularly need to care out the
details they just need the actual
shouting function that we've got here so
the way that we can make that stuff
available outside of this file this
module is by exporting it so we type
module which is the current file
exports so the exports of the current
module so this file are shout so we
don't need to be really careful of here
is that you don't include parentheses at
the end of shout if I include it if I
write that then I'm saying run the shout
function and whatever the result of that
is export that and that's not what I
want I don't want to export the result
of running the shout function I want to
export just the shout function on its
own so let's save this and see what
happens if we try requiring our file
again and with the dot slash because
we're requiring it from the folder that
we're in and what we see now is the same
object and actually I've made a little
bit of a mistake here because what I
forgot happens is once you've required
something note that only gonna require
it like actually run the code in there
once so if we want to now that we've
changed this file if we want to update
things over here we actually need to
control C and
the rattle and start it up again which
is a little bit annoying so if you get
to hear just make sure that you restart
the record every time you change a file
that you're requiring from it so let's
try that again require shout okay so I
got something a little bit different
this time I got this weird green
function shout thing so maybe now I can
try running my shout code and still no
we're still getting shout is not defined
and the reason for that is I need to
actually create a variable to put the
module in which is a little bit of a
weird idea
so we're exporting the shout function
but we need to say we want to refer to
it as inside this file or in this case
inside the repple so I can create a
variable called shout and make that the
require shout so now when I say shout I
get this function shout and if I run
shout with some parentheses and a
caption inside then sure enough I get my
result logged out which is awesome
that's what we wanted to see just a
moment on this whole thing about
requiring things and the variable that
we assign them to so we can actually
change the name of shout in his power to
whatever we want maybe we want to do BA
say very loudly is require counter and
now we can say very loudly
I like peas because you know maybe you
you really like peas and you want
everyone to know about it I think peas
are ok personally
I probably wouldn't make much noise of
albums so back in our my node script
file we need to do the same thing we
need to import me to require our shout
function before we can use it so shout
equals require remember that dot slash
because we recurring things locally
shout let's save that now and I'm gonna
quit node and run my file again load my
node script cool and now we get our
result and our two files are connected
properly they know about the my node
script file knows all about the shout
pile so there's one other thing that
like that's basically it for node by the
way it's JavaScript but it doesn't run
in the browser and the way that files
know about each other is with this
require thing that's pretty much all
there is to it
node comes with a bunch of like cool
extra libraries and stuff so I can do
things like work with paths and working
with files and making like getting stuff
from the internet and all of that sort
of thing but we're not going to look at
those things for a little while one
thing I did want to talk about though
just briefly because we are going to be
using it quite soon is NPM and what NPM
is and how it works so we've been using
NPM a bunch but we haven't really talked
about like why or what it's for so um
this is the the NPM website and NPM is
the package manager for JavaScript and
what that means is lots of JavaScript
code is out there on the Internet free
for us to include our own projects
and used to do whatever we want and each
little collection of things on NPM is
called a package we've already been
using some packages serve is a package
actually NPM itself is technically a
package and typically what we do when we
are working with a node project is we
make our own project a package as well
and you can tell that a particular thing
your folder is a package because it will
usually have a file in it called package
JSON and you might have seen package
JSON in some of the workshop folders
maybe in the assignment folders as well
and we're going to create one now so
just over here in our node noodles
whatever you call it project before we
move on I'm gonna commit my changes okay
shouting cool so let's get started with
NPM so the first thing that I wants to
do is run something called
NPM in it and this is kind of the same
as when we've been running stuff like
get in it it's a way of starting a new
package with NPM if I run that then
we're going to get this big long prompt
with a bunch of information for it take
a moment to read it but what it's gonna
do is ask us a bunch of questions about
the package that we're writing and let
us is then going to take all of the
answers that we give it
and put those in a package of JSON file
to like tell us and other people a
little bit about our package so a
package name I'm gonna I can press ENTER
if I want to take what they've given me
in premises is the default but I want
name to be node noodles version doesn't
really matter for what we're doing
description playing around with node
entry point so this is going to be like
the main file for your package and for
us that being my node script makes
probably a lot of sense so I'm going to
take that as it is test command we're
gonna leave that blank for now we'll
talk about that a little bit later git
repository we can leave that blank as
well
keywords same blank author I like to
write my name and email address in here
you can put whatever you want licensed
again you can just leave it at the
default and it's gonna show you what it
what it wants to save and just press
ENTER to say yes and accept that and you
might see over there in our editor that
it's actually created a package.json
file and if we open that up we can have
a look inside and see what it's added
it's added the name version description
all of that information that we entered
so the main thing that node is used for
sorry the main thing that NPM is used
for is installing packages so packages
are like bits of code that being written
by someone else that we want to download
and use in our program so we can have a
go at this now we can install a note
hich by typing npm install' and then the
name of the package and by the way there
are a lot of these if I go on the NPM
website and do a search for donkey or
something then I'm gonna get loads and
loads of apparently donkey related NPM
packages there's also a lots of much
more useful things like maybe you want
to write a note program that posts to
Twitter for you maybe what you do is you
go on NPM and search Twitter and here we
go first result is some node.js code for
creating Twitter posts and stuff the
conditions still in your project so
that's probably quite useful the one
that we want to install it's called
motivations so we can run npm install
motivations and when i hit run here i
want you to watch what happens in my my
terminal but also pay attention to my
packaged or json over here and see how
the package.json changes so if i hit
enter now to run this we get a little
progress bar while still installs and
here we go over here in my package.json
I've got this new section it says
dependencies and inside there I've got
motivations 1.1.2
so it's given us the name of the package
that we installed and the version that
we installed and what this means is that
anyone else who comes to our project and
wants to get all of the extra
dependencies for it can run npm install
and it will get all of those packages
for them so that's why we've been having
new run npm install on your workshop
projects so that you can
to serve in each one so what's actually
mean for that to be installed well if we
have a look in our File Explorer over
here we'll see that there's a few new
things as well as our package.json
there's also this thing called package
look JSON which you don't really need to
worry about for now all it does is just
include some extra information about the
very specific versions of whatever that
we've installed and we also have this
node modules folder and in here we'll
have a folder for every single package
that NPM has installed so if we look in
motivation we can see it's got a few
bits and pieces it's got a package dot
JSON of its own it's got an indexed or
JS file which we can have a look in it's
just a bunch of text and I read me
so some documentation so that's all good
now what happens when we actually want
to use this well just like we did here
when we required shout we can require
things from our node modules the
difference here is we don't need to
require with the dot slash anymore if we
just type of our motivations equals
require motivations then because there's
no dot slash node knows that it needs to
look in among some other places our node
modules folder so hopefully now I should
be able to console.log motivations and
we can have a look in there and see see
what's that let's save that and I'm
gonna run my code again node 9 no
descriptor chase okay so the result of
that is all of these motivations that
come in
pair of square brackets and what that
means is those that thing is an array so
the motivations package that we
installed it didn't give us a class it
didn't give us a function it gave us an
array so well maybe now we can change
this around a little bit into something
that actually actually does something so
what I'm gonna do is change my code so
that every time you run it it shouts a
random motivational statement which
seems like probably something that I
don't know I feel like I very much need
that on a Wednesday morning so first of
all I'm just going to open up the record
and play around a little bit to try and
figure out how I'm gonna do this I'm
gonna start node I'm gonna grab all my
motivations motivations equals require
motivations and let's just check what
we've got so this should be an array and
I know that arrays have a length so we
can use this to ask how many motivations
are and there's 62 that is a lot of
motivating so how can we choose one of
these randomly well javascript has this
function in it called math.random and
every single time we run math.random
it's gonna give us a random number
between 0 & 1 so we know it's gonna be 0
or more and less than 1 is this specific
range and in order to get a random
motivation we need to get one specific
motivation we need an index so
motivations 0 motivations 1 motivations
- we
a specific number or which of the
motivations in our list we want to get
and because the length of our
motivations is 62 the biggest number
that we can have that is gonna be 61 so
one less let's check out motivations 61
this should be the last motivation and
we can just check if we ask for no
motivation 62 we should get back
nothing value there we go undefined okay
so we know now that we need to get
because our motivation start at zero and
end at 61 a random number between zero
and sixty-one inclusive so scaling up
math.random from being between 0 and 1
to 0 and 62 is pretty easy we can just
multiply it by whatever the biggest one
should be so motivations dot length
instead of hard-coding 62 there we go so
we're gonna get a number between 0 and
62 now each time but these are all
fractional like decimal numbers and we 1
whole numbers integers so the way we do
that is by rounding thing but we don't
want to round up because if we round up
we might get to 62 and 62 is undefined
so we always want to round down and the
way that we do that is with math dot
flop so this is gonna take any number
that we give it like 1.5 or 1 and round
it down so regardless of how close it is
to the next one up it's always gonna get
rounded down
so we can take our master at random
times motivations to lengthen before and
take the result of that oh no my
keyboard is covering everything take the
result of that and maths top floor that
so now we should get a random number
between zero and sixty-one inclusive
every single time we run that line of
code so this is gonna be filled pretty
useful for us so I'm gonna take this
line that we figured out through playing
around in the record and doing some
experiments and copy it into my node
script here I probably want to be able
to talk about this number later on
because I'm going to need to use it to
get some the animal motivations so I'm
gonna store it in a variable
I'm gonna say random index equals my
math dot floor random x motivations dot
length and then I can use that random
index to get a random motivation let's
say motivations random index so using
this square bracket notation to say get
the motivation at number random index as
my random motivation and let's try
console it logging that out now to see
what it looks like save that and run
this node light node script okay there
we go we've got a motivational statement
we've still got I like shouting from
before that's fine as well
awesome so the last thing that we need
to do to get to what we wanted which is
a random shell
the motivational statement is replaced
console.log with shout and what we have
now is a program that imports sorry
requires two different modules the shamp
function and our motivations it chooses
a motivation at random and then it
shouts it back to us so when I run this
here you are super cool oh thanks
program that's nice that one's a bit cat
themed but ok amazing I feel so much
better having written this program I
feel like my life is like just
immeasurably better now awesome just um
before we wrap up because this is
basically oh we should commit our code
and actually that's a good point
so if I won't get status now we're gonna
see some maybe unexpected things so I
guess they're not unexpected but we've
modified our my node script which is
true and then an untracked files we've
got package lock drop Jason and package
generation which is also fine but we've
also got node modules in here now node
modules is basically gonna be full of
other people's code and because we've
got the names of the modules and their
versions listed in package dot jason we
don't really need to include them there
because anyone can just get our project
and run npm install and they get all
those things anyway in fact it's
generally considered kind of bad
practice to commit node modules in to
get so to avoid that we have to tell
node to ignore them so the way we do
that is by creating a new file called
dot get ignore
in there we list out every single file
and folder that we won't get to ignore
so we can just write node modules save
the file and if I run get status again
now there I can see that I've got my get
ignore as an untracked file but node
modules isn't in here anymore which is
all good so now I'm ready to commit
these changes get add the whole folder
okay commit motivational shouting okay
final thing before I sign off is like
this stuff that I added in here with all
the math dot random and all of that sort
of thing the only reason I know how to
do that is because I've done it like 50
times before and the first time I did it
I went on the internet and I googled
Java Script get random element from
array it's even suggested and I clicked
on this first result and I scrolled down
to this thing and I read the answer that
says exactly what we typed in math to
floor master at random times array dot
length so if you're thinking like oh how
did she like do that like I couldn't
figure out how to do that like just off
the top of my head that is like
absolutely fine because neither could i
I just googled it the first time but now
you know that trick too so I guess
that's okay anyway I hope this has been
useful bye have a nice life I guess okay